please welcome to the stage Stephanie
cousin vice president go to market
strategy and operations at lucid and
rodri de grief Vice President of Sales
and GM emia at Lucid good
morning I'm Steph cousin uh I'm the vice
president of go to market strategy and
operations at Lucid Software and I'm
rodri the grief I'm the VP sales of NGM
of Amia and today we're walking you
through a couple things through product
like growth to sales like growth yeah so
in order do that we thought we'd give
you a bit of context on on Lucid first
who we are we're the leading provider of
visual collaboration software with over
70 million users around the world I've
met a few at this conference and it's
been great to get to know you we serve
that Global customer base from based on
our our office in the US as well as
offices in Amsterdam Melbourne and in us
both Utah and North
Carolina so our product Suite includes
Lucid chart an intelligent diagramming
tool Lucid spark a vual collaboration
tool and Lucid skill a cloud
visualization application and we focus
to help teams build and collaborate
together in a visual way whether it's
engineering teams for creating Network
architecture diagrams HR building or
charts edl teams to do PI planning or
sales CS teams to do collaboration on
how to serve their customers in a more
efficient and safe time and enhanced
productivity all right so let's dive in
we thought with a we'd start with a
little bit on glcd history from our
launch to today sharing some of our key
milestones and our firsts we'll talk a
bit about our first paying customer and
the the beginnings of our product L
growth motion we'll then touch on our
first Enterprise customer and our first
sales hire and then we'll go deeper on
how we grew our plg and PLS motions in
parallel including how we expanded
internationally our we launched Lucid
chart in 2010 our Flagship product in
the beginning we were very much focused
on product development and primarily
engineer we had primarily Engineers like
many early companies
and excuse me and from there we in that
first year we had launched we had our
first paying customer pictured here with
our chief engineering officer and
co-founder and this is a major milestone
for our company of course for any
company and began we began to think
about our business model and what I'd
like to do is share a couple of
principles that help that we thought
through as we developed that business
model and while plg was I don't think
yet a term in 2010 these have ended up
being quite foundational to our plg
model so I said as I said a strong
product Le motion starts with a strong
product and this intense Focus early on
our product was not limited to to just
our product and Engineering teams uh in
fact when I joined Lucid 7 years ago as
our chief of staff one of the first
things I learned about my new boss who
was then our coo now our CEO was that he
was a fervent reader of customer support
tickets in fact he was famous internally
for having read over a 100,000 customer
support TI tickets yeah so of all the
unscalable things that he could do why
read that many customer support tickets
and it's because we've learned that
there is absolutely no substitute uh for
the voice of the customer and and we
don't mean some report aggregated or I
know there's many AI tools that allow
you to do this now but these are the the
pure and simple words that come from the
mouth or the keyboard of your customer
and this is a great example of one of
the keys to Our Success is that often
times you have to do something quite un
scaled to do something more scaled
quicker I apologize the clicker isn't
working would you be able
to
no all right our second principle simple
pricing and seamless expansion Lucid
employs a fremium model and earlier on
that meant converting our users to our
paid plans but as we began to
differentiate our product add more value
add more features that also meant UPS in
them and creating an expansion path and
to do this we invested very
significantly in a growth team that was
tasked with iterating on all aspects of
our pricing and packaging our click
pathing and our ctas and this became a
true champion of our culture of
experimentation internally which has
really defined our plg
model and so our last principle
widespread discoverability this is
really to drive distribution for Lucid
this meant a few things first we must be
found where our users are looking we
invest Ed a lot early on put a lot of
effort into making sure that both our
potential and existing users uh had to
know that we have we can solve a problem
that they have and the best place that
you could see this is in our investment
in our SEO program in in that content we
rank for over a thousand keywords and
phrases and that started very early on
and in this regard I think the term
product L sales actually it doesn't give
marketing enough credit there's a
substantial contribution from Marketing
in that it also meant that we joined we
we have to join ecosystems so that lucid
Works where our users work this is a
huge tenant for us as a product is let's
make sure that we work exactly where our
users are earlier on that meant a lot of
investment in in integration so that we
were able to be part of the launch of a
we able to be part of the the launch of
of the Google app Marketplace and since
then we've invested a lot in this and
are now available in the lasting
Marketplace in Microsoft 365 and slack
we also have Integrations that allow our
allow our users to bring in data from
platforms like AWS and Salesforce and of
course SSO providers but the biggest
thing there was to really be available
in those ecosystems uh and then last but
not least really important that we we
could drive that discoverability and
distribution through our own product
right making sure that users could
discover our product through their
colleagues using it through through
teams of their companies using
it as Steph mentioned these principles
were key to our commercialization off
efforts and it was not long before we
had our substantial paying user base
leading to our first Enterprise
customer in 20202 in 2012 we landed our
first Enterprise customer funny enough
here in the UK it was a large publishing
house we were they were in the midst of
a significant dig
transformation and they chose Lucid
chart at that time for their portfolio
to enhance collaboration productivity
and as well among a shift from Microsoft
Office to G Suite it required really
some changes to both our product and
process a significant overall of our
user and admin systems in a product to
skill with the Enterprise client in
addition it required to negotiate our
first Enterprise customer contract
undergo deep Security reviews Etc this
was a major proof point for us in
Enterprise space every product like
Growth Company will remember when they
do that first product that sales deal
they they will learn so much of that
Milestone and I'm proud that this
customer is still customer today over 10
years further
after that first Enterprise customer we
were ready for more it was time to build
our first sales team and we started our
s first sales higher in
2014 we realized that we had enough
users but they were scattered all over
over hundreds of organizations so
probably would be beneficial to start
talking to them a little bit more and we
hired somebody with a business
background under a special project and
threw the project at him so he started
talking to customers and peers in the
industry start to build out the inside
inside sales motion the first sales hire
after that was flying solo for a while
testing different sales strategies to
find the right formula he hired then his
first four sales
people and even when we hired the
initial team there were many multifaced
groups one compar I like to make is that
you build a SS team in difference with
like players like a basketball team at a
basketball team everybody needs to be
able to play multiple positions versus a
football team or sucker for the
Americans here the five players on that
team are there to mingle nowadays we
then started to fill out the sales
strategies we got the first playbooks in
and then we start to hire more we built
the sales teams in the difference
between the the football team yeah where
we have multiple positions you have
offense defense Strikers Defenders we do
that because it really helps you but it
does sound familiar that you wear many
hats in the beginning doesn't
it so we're going to hit a little bit
more in- depth on some of those
additional expansion Milestones but let
me share a high level overview we
expanded into new languages first
nowadays our solution supports 12
languages and we support over 31
languages in our customer facing and
goto Market teams and we embarked
further on localization efforts with our
growth marketing and product team we
opened offish offices internationally in
Amsterdam and in Melbourne and we
continue to introduce new products like
the visual collaboration suite and Lucid
skill all right so we've talked a bit
about firsts giving a sense of how we've
built our plg and PLS motions to those
Milestones but now we'd like to go
deeper on how we built our product Le
sales motion lucid's products are are
generally what we consider horizontal
meaning that we would every knowledge
worker can use them and with the success
of our plg that meant we had a very
scaled user base but also a very
Diversified user base with those users
being a part of all kinds of
organizations organizations with a
variety of documented use cases spanning
teams of all sizes organizations of all
sizes organizations within several
different Industries and of course
across many geographies speaking many
different
languages and these characteristics are
what define an organization as a
customer so while when we think about
plg we generally think about the user's
needs the users's Discovery the user's
path to Value when we talk about product
ledge sales we now need to incorporate
the customers needs based on those
characteristics and those
characteristics determine how a customer
purchases our software how a customer
adopts our software and also how our
customer engage engages with Lucid with
our account team to derive value from
our software and these are of course all
more complex at larger organizations at
organizations within certain regulatory
environments at organizations within
certain industries and this is really
where product Le sales comes into the
picture but really important to note
that here we stay true to our plg
principles how they purchased our
software we still need to have that that
simple pricing and seamless expansion
how they adopt our software we still
need to focus on the time to value and
of course when they engage with us we
need to drive that discoverability
right with that plg motion more complex
purchasing behaviors come there uh with
the plg motion first we had standardized
documents terms of we had our documents
secur documents ready payments was just
through the online platform it was
simple and easy however we introducing a
product Le sales motion as I said before
it involved addressing more complex
purchasing behaviors necessitating
enhanced legal and security and
compliance measures we need to a really
legal and security team to be involved
more in the negotiations compliance
efforts and of course effectively train
our sales teams on regulatory
requirements to navigate these complex
complexities
I know you will be tempted because we
were as well to facilitate every
customer as much as we can with their
wishes on for example jurisdictions or
certain uh security certifications but I
would advise you to minimize as much as
we can as you can your legal and
security teams can only handle a limited
amount of jurisdictions and security
certifications for example even today
with 17 million users on our system tens
of thousands of customers lose it will
still only allow a limited of countries
of legal jurisdiction and we have a
small team of corporate lawyers
supporting
us with that said as well I can give you
one more tip there's a lot of software
resellers and they every big Enterprise
customer has a software resetter on
their side as well they already have to
framework agreements they most time have
all the security documentation already
for you and it's a lot easier to run
through those and still lend to
Enterprise customers and basically work
in an easier
way all right so next more complex
adoption and usage is as one example one
one piece of dis differentiation here
onboarding and training looks quite
different for a customer versus a user
in plg so in plg you're onboarding your
users your day Zero and their path their
journey is quite defined right but in
product Le sales every user's Day Zero
is actually quite different and so we
may be onboarding a customer onto our
Enterprise plan and there are many users
that already have their day Zero some
will have their day Zer as we onboard
that Enterprise plan and still some may
may have their day Zero and and begin
their Journey with us throughout that
year right so this creates a very unique
dynamic in our customer Journey which is
not as much aligned to the single user
Journey but rather a collection of user
Journeys and and this makes it far more
complex and last more complex engagement
I'll see that earlier sales team that
Rod described as they began to engage
with larger organizations uh they often
our customers often had more more
complex and Technical needs um which is
a bit challenging for those those reps
um especially because we hadn't
anticipated this our our product is
known for being quite user friendly uh
and so to fill this Gap uh the our sales
folks uh began really leaning internally
on on certain resources and in
particular a very skilled member of our
technical support team who already had a
day job of course and so she was tapped
to increasingly attend customer meetings
on top of her normal workload and so
while this is another example of
something that was quite unscalable it
helped us learn what those technical
needs were from our customers and and
and we began developing some pattern
recognition from that while also meeting
their needs right so we eventually did
formalize her role is lucid's first
sales engineer and she was quickly
instrumental in many of our largest
deals but it was a major proof point to
us and how we could add value and scale
that function which is now a very
pivotal part of our sales motion
today uh so so one last Point here uh I
think it's really important to note that
uh We've layered on on our product Le
sales motion um it has not replaced our
product Le growth motion and they
actually build on and and uh and connect
with one another um and uh and leverage
and and create multiple layers within
within each
other so as we shared earlier one of the
most significant milestones in scaling
from product like growth to product
sales uh POS motion was expanding
internationally as this was really a
milestone for many scaling companies we
thought we touch a little bit more on
our decision-making process and
experience adding an international
office a first International office like
we covered in our timeline we had to
invest a lot up front in making so that
we were ready for to meet the needs for
Global user this effort started already
way before the decision to open X an
office going back to the plg principles
we shared earlier each of them applies
expanding to a global user we needed to
expend our language offerings and
product to improve the user experience
the easy fast PA to user value of a
non-english user keeping pricing simple
local was key we expended in currencies
in which we you could buy lucid and
we're still expending today making Lucid
is
discoverable in these and new languages
and also invested significant
translating and localization all our
websites or our website content was a
thing that we had to do these efforts
were extensions to our product like
growth motion and accelerated
accelerated our growth internationally
building user base and the customer base
uh that it is today
as we mentioned earlier core to your
product for product L sales is
understanding our customers complex
needs how they purchase software how
they adopt our software how they engage
with our accounting to derive value from
our software and these customers needs
are quite different from region to
region so how did we solve that
complexity first and foremost we wanted
to have proximity to our customers we
wanted to be close by able easily to
travel to them be near them speak to
them on a daily basis in their hours and
and then second language specifics again
we want to speak we want to have as many
languages in our company to service our
customers because really it's twisted
together and how use inter twist
together the culture and the language is
something that you really use third
Regulatory Compliance as I said before
there are certain rules in a local in
the local space or mandatory things you
want to have there that you need to be
able to service and as well sometimes
meaning having people in a certain
region and fourth operational efficiency
we wanted to make sure that we can
operate in the most efficient way that
we can speak to our customers on a daily
basis as well feeding information back
to our headquarters in the US it's so
interwined with each other when we
started the Amia office due to the size
and growth we were experiencing in the
region first we when we kicked off our
expansion team for Amia we sat down to
DET term of what matters there's a lot
of fantastic hubs in Europe ultimately
it came down to free key factors first
and foremost we need to find a solution
where the type of talent that could help
our achieve our goals our talent pool is
so important and as well it's something
that uh makes your hiring so much easier
second of course we had to consider
costs costs are uh for great talent for
office space and for taxes and thir we
had to consider ease of
operations from these factors we
narrowed down the list of free cities
and visit each location meeting with the
pier Sou companies with have local
offices already there as well local
governments helping on regulatory tax uh
schemes or other investment schemes that
are there and that uh basically helped
us to make our final
decision so I joined the team about 18
months after our office opened but I
want to touch briefly on the importance
of our approach to The origional Landing
team especially in the context of our
product Le sales motion we brought a
landing team of free season mid-level
managers Sals Cs and
revops this team was comprised of people
who have been at Lucid for some time
therefore they worked highly cross
functional and knew how to navigate as
well our sales motion and as well to get
engagement and the interest in the US
still the first few years our office had
only customer fac in roles it was
critical that we had these people who
could help us create a feedback loop as
I said uh for our marketing project
teams and then the organizations at HQ
back ensuring Amia customers were an
integral part in evolving our product Le
sales motion noways 33% of our revenue
is international and we're very proud of
that again when we go back to our key
factors the regional HQ was so
successful that we added an Apec HQ as
well in 2020 with these Regional Offices
we have been able to scale quicker
operate more efficiently we achieved our
goals to have a fully operation
autonomous office in region and that
doesn't happen in day one it happens
over the years when I started we only
had to customer facing roles nowadays we
added a lot of supporting roles HR
recruitment refs growth marketing
implementation and so on and with the
success again we are doing now 30 33% of
our Revenue
there so that International expansion
was only possible with us having the
internal alignment between product
marketing and sales to scale our motion
and a strong partnership between product
marketing and sales is core to the
product L sales motion so let's talk a
little bit about that partnership as I
mentioned earlier the customer journey
is quite different in a product L sales
motion and it creates a lot of Blurred
Lines of ownership internally and
therefore we have to be incredibly tight
on our objectives between product
marketing and sales and as I I look back
on when we began layering on sales to
our product Leed motion the Special
Sauce here was really establishing how
we in was really in how we integrated
sales so as Rod mentioned earlier our
first sales hire was actually not a
salesperson and this was the person who
not only Built out the sales function
became a very senior level leader and it
was someone who was deeply familiar with
our product Le motion already had strong
relationships with our marketing and
product teams and a working knowledge of
those functions and this was absolutely
key and to scale product L sales you you
have to have that strong feedback loop
and and this was a person that could
uniquely do it and this is not just for
sales it's really for the rest of your
company as well as you layer on sales
you will find that scaling that motion
will also require a good amount of
evangelism a good amount of integration
a good amount of disruption in order for
the entire company to really evolve the
culture around having two motions a
product LED and a sales motion so when I
when I think about this partnership I
think there's no better better way
internally to reflect upon this than to
talk about signal optimization and our
signal optimization framework so so what
do I need by signal optimization I think
many of you are familiar with product
qualified leads product qualified
accounts product qualified users all of
the pqs right I think there's probably
more but what this really means and
comes down to is identifying the right
people on the right Accounts at the
right time with the right actions and
and product marketing and sales must be
tightly aligned on the definitions of
each of these because they'll be
constantly evolving they'll be evolving
as you as you iterate on your product as
you launch new products as you evolve
your emotion and so you must always be
signal optimizing when I joined Lucid 7
years ago I wasn't in a revenue role but
I my first day actually I was thrown
into a meeting where the first thing we
were doing was talking about our our
user scoring model and how we were going
to add to it and over the last seven
years I've worn many different hats at
the company and I can't even tell you
how many produ projects I've worked on
and initiatives I've worked on related
to Signal optimization and even last
quarter a couple of things that that my
team has worked on or we revamped our
user scoring model we debuted a new
prospecting tool for our new logo teams
we created a new new playbook for
collabor collaboration signals for our
customer success teams and I think this
speaks a lot to the success we've had
with the culture of experimentation that
started with our product Le motion has
now been very core to our sales our
product product Le sales motion as well
some learnings from those seven years of
signal optimization in the beginning I
think the most important alignment that
we could have is not actually
identifying so much who we want sales to
engage with but rather who we don't want
sales to engage with and this process of
elimination will help you calibrate your
your PQ pql pqa model um and it also
leverages one of the cheap advantages of
product Leed growth which is volume and
the more sample size you have the more
you can learn and then the quicker you
can learn secondly I would encourage you
to start with actions and then build the
signal so Focus just as much on the
actions as on the signals that you want
to lead to those actions and what do I
mean by that I think for a lot of
product LED growth companies that have a
strong motion that culture of
experimentation they'll focus on like
over calibrating what those signals are
you have a very engaged user base a
highly skilled user base and so you'll
spend a lot of time on the
experimentation between between those
signals as opposed to what is sales
doing to engage with each of those users
right and that needs to be just as much
a part of it and so you need to start
with the actions start with the plays
and then build the signals to support
those and of course as you as you scale
your team you're going to have more
segmentation in your sales roles and
you'll find that you have a quite
different set of actions or plays and
therefore a quite different set of Act
of signals for each of those teams as an
example our Enterprise team that's that
that works with our very largest
customers they have a very different set
of plays and signals than our SNB new
logo team as an example and lastly I
would just encourage you to think that
there's far more to this than lead and
account scoring so beyond all the pqs
pqls um what this really means is
everyone at the company should be
leveraging information about your users
about your customers to inform how they
add value to your customers and users
and and in in that in that same sense
this is more than just lead and account
scoring it really needs to be have a
democratized set of information that
everyone is using they're all singing
from the same song
sheet okay so when we talk about
partnership between in sales we're
talking about sales Loosely we we really
mean is that we work together as an
account team our AES our bdrs our sdrs
our csms our SE implementation team
Professional Services and Consultants
but we first layered that on the product
that sales motion which like most plg
companies do we very were heavily R&D
focused we didn't have all these rules
as we saw success in laying layering on
the product Le sales we two decisions
about scaling the product Le sales
motion is about structuring the account
team and their roles and
responsibilities in product like grow
each of the members of the county must
understand how the account users are
using Lucid in order to engage with them
effectively the same culture of
experimentation initiate to our product
led to growth routs had driven our
literate and learn how to best structure
our coverage strategy to meet the needs
of our customers so we changed a lot of
things we changed our CSM motion we
split it into an implementation versus
SE versus true customer success we split
our sales motion into new logo and
expansion just to make sure that we
cover the needs of our customers our
customers are
Central and as I said we want to focus
on this every digital transformation
looks different our sales and customer
success and product must all be lightly
aligned to on our objective with the
customer and activities that we
engage we must tightly be aligned on our
people processes systems what we use all
together how we work all together and as
well everybody's rules naturally we use
our own products to drive alignment a
few examples are Marketing sales and
customer success teams align on
communication sequences with our
customers and life cycle
management our account teams leverage
shared account planning to drive
alignment between the customer
objectives and
activities and similar and similarly for
our qbrs again it's probably sounds
familiar but in the first years you
usually don't have the funds to have
every tool or higher for every role your
day consists of wearing different caps
from CEO to C to VP of sales and
marketing director or chief apologizing
officer sometimes and there are examples
of in every Department in your company
and Lucid start to draw out this already
from the beginning every process was
drawn out it made e easier to drive our
scalability it D into new markets and as
well in a consistent way but as well to
hire new people and get them on board
quicker or optimizing our teex
Tech but just as important demonstrating
maturity to in a transparent way to our
investors having established processes
potential and current investor to
current and potential investors made
that we are well-managed that we're
manag that we're made made for scaling
and which is attractive to investors
looking for stability and
predictability we are almost at the end
of our presentation I want to close up
with one more thing before I hand it
over to Steph at the core of this
alignment is a practice of Team based
selling even today our chief product
officer meets with our clients on a
daily basis our chief marketing officer
is right now in Amsterdam to speak to
our reps to hear and learn what they
hear in the fields yeah it it is really
team based selling and that's with all
our executive group Steph is here I'm
traveling to the us our executives are
still just as much in the product like
growth uh motion as that that they are
in the SSL motion so I want to close off
by saying there is no IR product Le
growth and there is no I in product Le
sales growth Steph yeah so we've covered
a lot today to quickly recap some of the
key takeaways and that we had in helping
you build and scale your plg and PLS
motion first experimentation must be at
the core of how you operate um and this
can't just this is a well-known
principle in plg but it must extend to
your PLS motion and of course it should
extend well beyond your product and
Engineering teams it needs to extend to
the whole company this has been really
cordal lucid um second doing something
unscaled can enable you to scale faster
whether that's reading hundreds of
thousands of customer support tickets or
uh having a customer support rep
Moonlight as a a solution engineer um
these are things that help you uniquely
learn from your customers in an unscaled
way so that you can scale faster and
last you must stay true to your your
business model principles your plg
principles and in our case this was
really just that product Le sales is
applying those same plg principles but
for the customer thank you so much thank
you
he